Blog post: introducing the new scheduler (#31)
async-rs/async.rs: source/blog/2019-12-16-stop-worrying-about-blocking-the-new-async-std-runtime.html.md

We announced [async-std](https://async.rs/) on August 16th - exactly 4 month ago. Our focus for the initial release was providing a stable and reliable API for users to build async applications on, modelled after Rust standard library. It came with a number of innovative implementations: The first implementation of a `JoinHandle` based task API and single-allocation tasks.

Today, we’re introducing the new [async-std](https://async.rs/) runtime. It features a lot of improvements, but the main news is that it eliminates a major source of bugs and performance issues in concurrent programs: accidental blocking.

In summary:

- The new runtime is **really fast** and outperforms the old one.
- The new runtime is **universal** in the sense that it adapts to different workloads automatically, becoming single-threaded or multi-threaded on demand. If a single thread can handle all the work, we don’t pay the price of work-stealing.
- The new runtime is **conceptually simpler**, by removing the split between the non-blocking and the blocking threadpool.

> - The new runtime **detects blocking** automatically. We don’t need `[spawn_blocking](https://docs.rs/async-std/1.2.0/async_std/task/fn.spawn_blocking.html)` anymore and can simply deprecate it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The new runtime **detects blocking** automatically. We don’t need [`spawn_blocking`](https://docs.rs/async-std/1.2.0/async_std/task/fn.spawn_blocking.html) anymore and can simply deprecate it.
```

```rust
async fn read_to_string<P: AsRef<Path>>(path: P) -> io::Result<String> {
    let path = path.as_ref().to_owned();
    spawn_blocking(move || std::fs::read_to_string(path)).await
}
```

Note two crucial things:

- We call `spawn_blocking` to isolate the blocking operation.
- We always clone the path and execute the blocking operation on a separate threadpool, even if the file is cached and will be read in an instant.

The new runtime relieves you of these concerns and allows you to do the blocking operation directly inside the async function:

```rust
async fn read_to_string(path: impl AsRef<Path>) -> io::Result<String> {
    std::fs::read_to_string(path)
}
```

The runtime measures the time it takes to perform the blocking operation and if it takes a while, a new thread is automatically spawned and replaces the old executor thread. That way, only the current task is blocked on the operation rather than the whole executor thread or the whole runtime. If the blocking operation is quick, we don’t spawn a new thread and therefore no additional cost is inflicted.

> If you still want to make sure the operation runs in the background and doesn’t block the current task either, you can *still* simply spawn a regular task and do the blocking work inside it:

Reviewer: I feel like there is one "still" too many :)

```suggestion
If you *still* want to make sure the operation runs in the background and doesn’t block the current task either, you can simply spawn a regular task and do the blocking work inside it:
```

![Graph of different benchmarks. wrk -t1 -c50 -d10: new scheduler is 2 times faster. wrk -t10 -c50 -d10: new scheduler is 5 times faster. wrk -t1 -c500 -d10: new scheduler is 15 times faster](/images/async-std-http-benchmark-new-vs-old-scheduler.svg)

The new runtime is faster in general and scales way better to take available resources.

## Small and well-documented

The new runtime is small, uses no `unsafe` and is documented. Please take a look at [the source](https://github.com/stjepang/async-std/tree/new-scheduler/src/rt) to see how it works. Feel free to ask questions on the [pull request]( https://github.com/async-rs/async-std/pull/631)! There are still plenty of optimization opportunities and we will continue to blog about those details!

## Trying it out

To try out the new scheduler before release, modify your `Cargo.toml` this way:

```toml
async-std = { git = 'https://github.com/async-rs/async-std', branch = 'new-scheduler' }
```

Please report on your experiences - and report potential bugs!

## Summary

> The new `async-std` runtime relieves programmers of the burden of isolating blocking code from async code. You simply don’t have to worry about it any more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new `async-std` runtime relieves programmers of the burden of isolating blocking code from async code. You simply don’t have to worry about it anymore.
```
